JOHNNY: I am predator-proofing
my camp right now.
More specifically,
this meat cache.
And I'm going to be putting
these some extra stove pipe
that I have, and I'm going
to wrap them around the tree.
Further up, of course.
Once they hit this
metal, their claws,
they can't grip into the tree,
so it brings them right back
to square one.
Everything out here
has access to my fridge,
whether I like it or not.
The animals, they'll take
advantage of anything they see.
If there's food laying around...
Oh, yeah.
They'll help themselves
to whatever they find.
So, I had gotten a caribou,
and it was late in the evening,
so I hung it up here.
And I woke up the next day,
and it was gone.
The bear grabbed the
caribou, ripped it down,
drug it through all the brush,
and it was ripped
open pretty good.
It tore up the ribs and
spread the hindquarters apart,
and there were bear
tracks around it,
so it was pretty obvious
that it was a grizzly bear.
At that point, the bear
has claimed that kill,
so it's its property.
And I felt like I was
trespassing around the caribou
that I had shot at that point.
It was an eerie feeling,
to know that, you know,
that bear could be just
right over in the brush,
or in the bushes,
and it would definitely defend
that kill with its life,
and I'm not ready to die.
I just worry a lot.
This is my food
here, you know,
if they get to the food,
it's, it'll be a tough time,
especially with
these cold temperatures,
to be well fed.
I mean I eat, I eat
quite a bit of fat out here.
It's amazing how my body
adapts to the environment,
and since being out here,
it just craves fat.
I'm a pretty lean guy.
So, it's important to
safeguard the caribou
meat that I do have.
(howling).
Do you hear that?
Wolves.
(howling).
It's probably about a
dozen wolves, at least.
The wolves
concern me with Java.
They come out here, and
they come around the camp,
they try to lure
her away from me.
And their goal is
to take her out,
because they look at
her as competition.
And they try to kind
of flirt with her,
and pull her away from me,
in a way that makes them,
like, not appear dangerous.
And then, once
she's away from me,
that's when they kind of
start to try to circle her.
That's ultimately my
biggest fear with the wolves.
They're not going to
access my meat up here
or anything like that.
I don't have to
worry about that.
I just worry about my dog.
Java! Come here.
Come on. You stay.
Everything out here
is trying to survive,
including myself.
Short term goals are to
stay warm, stay fed.
Don't get killed.
ALEX: I kind of got
impending doom over my
shoulders for the winter.
It's getting colder.
Pretty much whenever
there's a bad situation,
it automatically
goes to worse.
Now that it's winter,
and I just kind of
had a big cold snap,
it was like, 30 below
for a couple days, uh,
it means I spend
more time on my cabin.
And just recently,
I noticed this should
be cool to the touch.
When I got a hot
fire going on in here,
this is getting
just as hot almost.
It's actually, I touched it,
and it burnt me a little bit.
It should not be that hot,
because it's going against the
insulation in there,
and the wood.
So, if this is
getting that hot,
that's a huge fire hazard.
I need to replace this,
basically this whole
chimney system,
uh, which is gonna involve
tearing apart this wall,
and everything.
So, it's gonna be
kind of a big job.
It's about to be the longest,
darkest days of winter.
This is the time of year when
I'm making fires very often,
sometimes all day long,
I have a fire going.
I simply cannot survive
without a wood stove.
Which means the risk of
setting my cabin on fire
is extremely high.
I made a small fire
early this morning,
just to get a little
bit of heat in here.
But the stove's
totally cool now.
And, uh, I won't be making
another fire in here until
I get my chimney replaced.
My cabin is gonna
cool down rapidly.
If my cabin freezes up,
especially if all of my
water freezes, you know,
then I'm left two options.
Go haul more water,
or melt snow,
which takes forever.
It's just a
situation I wanna avoid.
There's time pressure,
but I need to make
sure that I go slow,
because if
I try to go fast,
I'll just make a
mess of things.
KALEB: It's important that
children learn the things that
are necessary to make a
homestead like this function,
so that they can succeed in the
future as they turn into adults,
and become the next
generation of Alaskans.
BRITTANY: Whatcha think, Ellie?
ELOVIE: Cool.
KALEB: The smoker that I'm
building today is just a bunch
of cinderblocks stacked
together in about a
four-foot square shape.
You know that when
Grandpa built this smoker,
his great idea was
to use welding rod
to hold the grates up.
I'm hoping this smoker is an
opportunity to teach my kids a
little more about the
fundamentals of building.
BRITTANY: Keep going. Yeah!
ELOVIE: Haha!
KALEB: And it teaches them a
little more about taking pride
in your work,
doing a good job.
All right.
Shall we try this
screen out, Ellie?
ELOVIE: Yeah.
KALEB: See if
Grandpa's ideas works.
Look at that! It works.
And then, getting to teach them
a little bit about food prep.
Go get some firewood
and torch this off,
and then, we can maybe go
hunt for some fresh game.
You wanna go hunting?
BRITTANY: Ellie, when
Mama was pregnant with you,
Daddy and Gilbert and I
went ptarmigan hunting,
and you were in my belly then!
So, you have gone
ptarmigan hunting.
When you were in
mommy's tummy!
KALEB: Go head on out and get
some fresh meat to put in here,
and while I'm out there,
the whole mountainside is
covered in good alder that
we'll smoke the meat with.
So, I'll bring some
of that back, too.
BRITTANY: Cool.
Come on, Ellie, let's go.
Elovie is always gung-ho
to try different things,
including going
hunting with Kaleb.
I love that, as
she's gotten older,
she's actually
able to go with him.
It's wonderful to be able to
see her grow into herself,
and be able to
do these things.
KALEB: Piper, stay home.
ELOVIE: Stay!
KALEB: Elovie is gonna have
a unique opportunity today.
She gets one on
one time with me,
in the mountains,
doing what I love most,
hunting wild game.
There's no guarantees, I have
not been up to the bowl where
we're going hunting.
There should be a foot,
foot and a half of snow.
And so, we're taking the
snow machine up there,
and we'll just have
to look around,
and see what we can find.
MICHAEL: I take a lot
of pride training and
running a subsistence team.
And so, what you see here,
is you see tradition.
And the tradition is strong.
(barking).
Quiet down, you
little knuckleheads.
You guys are nuts.
You wanna be a sled dog?
Wanna go for a run?
First run.
Earlier today, the
winds come through.
We had white out conditions.
These trees were
snapping and cracking.
I had a great big branch
fall off into the puppy lot.
But things have settled down.
The visibility has improved.
I can actually see around me.
The winds have
dropped down, and so,
this is a perfect time to get
on the trail and start running
these dogs on their first run.
This is the dog
mushing season.
The way I start
my training out,
is I usually tie them up
to a sled with no weight,
get the muscles moving,
get the tendons moving.
Line up, come on.
Line up. Stay.
My goal on this first run is
just getting them back in tune
with their commands.
Getting them
psychologically prepared
to be back on the trail.
Come on.
So, I'm gonna hook up
three dogs at a time,
that's about a
two-mile run total.
Short trips...
Stay!
Actually help the dogs focus.
Eventually, we do back
to back five milers.
Ten milers.
You know, you gotta crawl,
walk, and then, run.
And so, this is
the crawl phase.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
Go get 'em! Hyah! Hyah!
Go get 'em! Hyah!
Hyah! Hyah! Hyah!
Good boys.
These dogs, they love
to be out on the trail.
Come on.
Good boys.
The genetics of the
Malamute, they've been
bred by indigenous people
of the Northwest Arctic for
hundreds of generations
to be kind, courteous...
Gee over.
Powerful, hearty animals.
Awoo!
I can cover 20 to 30
miles a day with these dogs,
hauling 800 pounds of stuff.
Straight ahead.
For me, being an
East Coast Indian,
this is a very
natural way of travel.
It's in my blood, it's
in my ancestors' blood.
Mushing was the way
that things were done.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
Whoa!
I'm sorry, guys, your trail.
It's blocked up.
MICHAEL: Whoa, whoa,
whoa, whoa, whoa.
Halt. Whoa!
Oh, shoot.
The trail, it's blocked up.
We got two trees down.
This is a little
bit of a problem.
This is my loop that
takes me down to the river,
it gets them their first hill.
Once you start miling them up,
you gotta keep 'em going,
keep 'em going,
every single day.
A couple of trees down over
the trail, it happens.
But unfortunately,
it's the beginning of
the training season.
I can't be
stopped up for this,
so this has gotta
be cleared out.
That's a pretty
violent snap on that tree.
It's not rotten in the
middle, it's a good piece.
I'll buck that
one up as firewood,
and clear it off the trail.
This next one here,
significantly larger.
It's gotta be about
two foot at the base.
I'm making a note.
I need a chainsaw mill,
a small firewood saw.
(barking).
These dogs are really anxious,
they got a lot of energy.
All right, let's get
you turned around.
Go get 'em!
Hyah! Hyah! Hyah!
Good boys.
JOHNNY: I'm living in a place
where humans don't really live.
It's up to me to figure
out how to live out here.
There's not a lot of
second chances that I get,
so I kind of gotta figure it
out the first time around.
Hey, Java, I thought
you were getting the
tool bag for me, huh?
Carry your own weight,
or do you just wanna sit
around and eat all day?
NARRATOR: Having lost
valuable meat to a bear
who came into his camp,
Johnny must protect his
property from anymore damage.
In order to keep
himself and his dog safe,
he must secure any
openings to his cabin.
JOHNNY: You know, a bear
will get into a cabin
if it wants to get in.
They're a lot smarter
than we make them out to be.
But the goal is to
hide this window,
and it doesn't know
there's a window here.
And that's, to me,
outsmarting the bear.
Go ahead, Java.
Get it. There she goes.
She kind of cleans up all
of the construction scraps.
I'm not complaining.
These two pieces will go,
one here and one here.
I'm gonna cut these
shutters to size,
and they'll essentially
be fixed to these two
vertical pieces.
So then, it's just one solid
piece that I just put right up
into this space.
The little projects
that I do out here,
they keep me going.
They keep me positive.
They keep me getting
out of bed every day.
And if I didn't have
little projects to do,
then, you know, it'd
be boring out here.
And I'm not looking
for a boring life.
This is the last
nail for this one.
Nice.
That's a nice, snug fit.
Yeah, I feel a little
safer leaving camp
for longer durations.
The wildlife out
here is abound.
There are critters everywhere.
But, you know, it's like, be
careful what you wish for,
because I've always wanted to
see a lot of these animals,
but I'm seeing a lot of them.
And, you know, every day, it's
like a different animal is
trying to present a
challenge for me.
Java. You wanna go eat?
Come on, let's call it a day.
Come on!
ALEX: When it's cold,
it's cold.
And it stays cold
for a long time.
When it's 40 below
or 50 below outside,
you gotta do a lot
of work to stay warm.
It's pretty dangerous.
I mean, the falling ice tells
you it's way above freezing,
is what it tells you.
Redoing my
chimney is essential.
But it's also gonna
be inherently risky.
My roof is extremely steep,
and it's definitely not safe
for me to just be
standing on a ladder,
doing this kind of
work, unprotected.
If I start to fall,
there's nothing, you know,
there's no, nothing
to catch me on.
So I'll fall all the way down.
So, I need a rope to
hold the, you know,
going over to hold the
ladder from the other side,
so that it can't swing.
And then, also a
rope to hold myself,
uh, on the other side.
Let me grab that.
Basically, I'll have a rope
going across the roof of the
cabin to a tree
on the other side.
The rope will allow
me to work safely,
work confidently, without having
to worry about falling off.
I'll have a harness
that I can clip into it.
That way, there's a nice
tight rope holding me.
So this way, if
I slip or fall,
I'll just lean on the rope.
In order to set up my
kind of rope safety system,
I do have to go up
the ladder unprotected,
and throw a rope over.
I got a heavy iron
shackle on one end to
give it some weight.
I need to kind of
wind up a little more,
which makes me nervous.
I'm working on a ladder on
the side of an icy roof.
You know, I don't wanna fall.
This might be the most
dangerous kind of part,
is just setting up my anchor.
This is one of the situations
where it's not enough that
I just try hard.
I have to do it right, because
if I get injured out here, uh,
even, you know, a
relatively minor injury that
might not be a big deal
if I got hurt in the city,
out here, it can be
a death sentence.
This (bleep) heavy.
(bleep). (bleep).
It's definitely not safe for me
to just be standing on a ladder,
doing this kind of
work, unprotected.
Second time.
But, you know, any
time I'm working alone,
a lot of my time is
spent figuring out all these
different safety systems.
Get the hell off
this death trap.
Now I just gotta
find a good tree,
something nice and solid
to tie my anchor off of.
Something that will
hold my weight if I fall.
There's my rope.
And now I can go set up
the end of the rope that
I will be connected to.
Of course, which I
always wanna do is test it.
So, it should be able to
adjust it as I climb up,
and it will hold my
weight if I fall.
I'm focused on doing
this as safe as I can,
but I got a lot of things
kind of fighting against me.
I got this cold snow
blowing in my face.
Just have the steepness
and the slickness of
this metal roof.
Here it comes.
At this point, my body is pretty
exhausted, but, you know,
I'm still a long ways
from finished with this job.
So, there's no
turning back now,
because now, I don't
have a stove anymore.
MICHAEL: You can't just stop
because something is strenuous.
You gotta keep going.
And so, that's
part of life up here.
Get 'em! Get 'em!
Go get 'em! Good girl!
Look at you go!
All right.
Right out that way
is my five-mile loop.
I gotta get on that.
These dogs have
to keep miling up.
It's time for that
first winter caribou hunt,
and these dogs are
my transportation.
It's very important,
they gotta keep running.
And that will prevent injuries
on the trails during expedition.
I'm gonna go ahead, fire
up my little chainsaw.
Then I'm gonna try to
clear out all this old,
rotten willow.
It seems like I am
attached by a dummy cord
to this darn chainsaw.
What a mess!
I bought it used
for next to nothing,
and it has handled year after
year after year of cutting.
The winds are picking up.
I actually don't like
working around these treetops.
A 60, 70, 80 mile an hour
gust will come through,
and just snap these trees
like they're toothpicks.
Gonna have to hurry
up and clear this out.
Look at that.
My five-mile loop
is clear again.
I just bucked up that
small tree as firewood.
That big tree, I'm just
gonna mill it up real
quick with my saw mill.
It's gonna make
some nice lumber.
And so, I got this
ladder brought out here,
and this is just
to act as a guide,
so my first cut will
be somewhat straight,
and I can continue to cut this
two and a half inches thick
the whole way down.
This thing is an
absolute beast.
Lot of work involved,
but if you do the work,
you don't have to buy
store-bought lumber.
I spent my whole life
working, working, working,
and we're just
programmed to desire
all these things that we
know we can't afford.
That's unsustainable
for the human spirit.
So, if I have to do a little
physical labor, big deal.
It is liberating, not feeding
all these greedy systems.
All right. First cut.
Beautiful piece right there.
I'll make a nice
bench out of that.
All that brush seemed
like an impenetrable
barrier in the moment,
but after doing
a little bit of work,
I've got a nice
load of firewood,
and I'll have slabs.
It ended up turning
into an amazing situation,
where a barrier
became an asset.
But right now, the winds are
picking up something fierce.
I wanna get this done
and get outta here.
KALEB: Living out here, I have
to go out in the woods and
harvest the meat,
process the meat,
and then, I have
to preserve it.
Whatever method is used,
I personally have to do.
These tracks are
all old, Ellie.
Check out all those
tracks over there, okay?
I'm heading out into the
mountains to hunt ptarmigan,
and I get to go teach my
daughter a little bit about
hunting wild game.
Stand up.
You're doing great, Ellie.
Ptarmigan are a
small grouse species.
They usually live up
in the high country.
They turn white
in the wintertime,
so they're
extremely hard to see.
Usually the only reason
you see them is by
looking for shapes.
You have to learn the
shape of a ptarmigan,
and if you can learn that,
you can find them.
Look at these
ptarmigan tracks!
These are kind of old, though.
ELOVIE: How?
KALEB: See how they look like
there's a little bit of snow
in the bottom of them?
It snowed two days ago.
So these ptarmigan were up
here when it was snowing.
And they've flown
off somewhere else.
We need to go find some
more tracks somewhere else.
Where maybe they've been
a little bit sooner.
All right, let's go.
Wow, Ellie.
ELOVIE: Dad,
what are you doing?
KALEB: Need to get
my binoculars out.
ELOVIE: Can I help you also?
KALEB: Look at that!
ELOVIE: Whoa.
ELOVIE: Yeah.
KALEB: Through the binoculars?
ELOVIE: Yup.
KALEB: Yup.
KALEB: Elovie just loved
seeing the moose today.
They're just
wintering up there.
They're way up in
the high country.
And they'll stay up there until
the snow starts to get deep,
and it pushes them
down the mountain.
Ellie, it's pretty cool seeing
stuff move around up here.
We've seen old
ptarmigan tracks.
But so far, we're
not really seeing any,
anything fresh
for ptarmigan, so.
KALEB: Yeah, we
can't do that right now.
ELOVIE: When?
KALEB: I know, it's
pretty exciting seeing the
moose, though, isn't it?
KALEB: We can shoot
the moose in September.
KALEB: Oh, it's not sad.
There's a reason
for hunting seasons.
If you just went and killed
all the animals because you
could hunt year-round then
there'd be nothing left,
and we wouldn't be able to use
that resource in the future.
Today was a good opportunity to
teach my daughter a little bit
about conservation,
and we have to be
responsible stewards.
And always remember that if we
want this to be here tomorrow,
we need to be very careful
about our actions today.
Check out the moose scat.
ELOVIE: That is poop.
KALEB: It's been
here a couple days.
You think it's the
same moose we just saw?
ELOVIE: Uh-huh.
KALEB: Yeah, I bet so, too.
It looks like he's been
living on the hillside
here for a few days.
ELOVIE: Maybe.
KALEB: I saw all sorts
of beds on the road.
I think he's just
hangin' out up here,
enjoying the view.
What do you think?
ELOVIE: Yeah.
KALEB: It's pretty gorgeous.
ELOVIE: Uh-huh.
KALEB: Well.
So, it might be time to
head down the mountain and
get our alder firewood.
Ready to go do that?
ELOVIE: Yeah.
KALEB: All right. Let's go.
We might not have been
successful with our
little ptarmigan hunt,
which really depends on your
definition of success.
I would consider it
success because I had a
great afternoon with my
daughter in the mountains.
Just sit there and watch
while I get some alders,
and you will cool off.
'Kay?
Fortunately, we plan ahead,
and we have meat in the
freezer from our
last hunting season,
that we can call upon
to put in the smoker,
instead of what we
attempted to harvest today.
All right, Ellie, think that's
enough to smoke some meat?
ELOVIE: Let's, let's boogie!
KALEB: Let's boogie!
Apparently,
you're ready to go.
ELOVIE: Let's go!
KALEB: Let's go.
MICHAEL: This is a
hard environment.
The darkness, the cold.
I don't try to play
tough guy in Alaska.
All right.
The winds have died down.
The sun's peeking out.
It's nice and cold.
It's a good time to
move some heavy stuff.
This was originally a
big tangled mess over
my five-mile loop.
But in the end, after
all that hard work,
I'm gonna come out of
here with a bunch of lumber,
and some firewood.
And so now, I'm gonna
take my time and haul
one piece at a time.
(barking).
Whoa, whoa, whoa!
These dogs don't
give me much time to
do anything, really.
They're just knuckleheads
this time of the year.
Hey! Line up!
Come on! Line up!
Super hardheaded breed.
Hard workers and
hardheaded as well.
You stay lined up.
You ready? Go get 'em! Go!
Whoa! Whoa, whoa!
Slow down.
This is actually the
first time that I've hauled a
16-foot slab with this
sled, and it works perfectly.
If I get about
three more dogs,
I could probably just
load the entire sled up.
But for right now, we need
these dogs to get in shape
before I really start puttin'
the miles and weight on 'em.
But this is just
early season training,
and they're already
getting work done.
Whoa!
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa!
Good dogs.
I wouldn't have been able to
move that by myself without
straining my back.
And so, what you're seeing
here is a traditional way to
move stuff around.
Goods and supplies,
freight, lumber, firewood.
You name it.
All you gotta do is just
fire up a few malamutes.
All right.
Time to go with another team.
Straight ahead!
The training regimen
in the winter time,
it starts the second
that snow hits the ground.
Haw! Haw!
Good boys.
This is the best time
of the year in Alaska.
It's cold, it's brutal, and
these dogs motivate you to
get out here, get
the blood pumpin'.
They really do help me cope
with the dark and the cold.
I can't sit around idle.
They have to work.
It's their season.
Whoa, whoa, whoa!
(barking).
All right.
Look at those slabs of wood.
This color right here,
it's such a comforting color.
It's this warm,
setting of the sun color,
mixed in with wispy clouds.
And so, with that setting sun,
I gotta keep movin',
keep runnin', keep puttin'
them miles on them dogs.
I got two in one shot,
bunch of wood and some
miles on my dogs.
I'm gonna get one more run in.
JOHNNY: Complacency is
what's gonna kill you.
So out here, I
like to stay moving.
I don't like to stop,
you know.
There's so much to do.
Just surviving alone will
take up most of your time.
What you smell, Java? Huh?
Oh, yeah. These are all
broken branches.
This one's living too, so.
There's, yeah, you can see
the bear's hair right here.
Yeah.
What he does is he
just comes over here,
and he puts his
back against the tree,
and just kind of
marks his territory,
and any branches that
are in the way just break
or fall on the ground.
It's a good day to be doing a,
a little bit of bear defense
on the cabin, that's for sure.
Come here, Java.
Hey! Come here.
My goal today is to
make a latch for the
door for the cabin.
The purpose of the latch is
to keep Java in the cabin
when it's necessary.
I rarely leave her in there
without myself being in there.
But there are times usually
when there are bears or wolves
roaming that, uh, it's, it's
kind of important to keep her
in there for her own safety.
So I got to find a, a little
spruce tree to cut down.
And that's gonna be, uh,
what goes through the door.
And, um, I'll have a
handle on each end of that.
Let's see, let's see.
God, that's such a, that's
a big (bleep) grizzly bear!
Look at that.
♪ ♪
JOHNNY: God, that's
such a, that's a big
(bleep) grizzly bear!
Look at that.
You could see where
its nails, that's a big,
that's a big paw.
And that's the
right, right foot,
and that's the
left foot there.
And he's moving, he's
moving toward my camp.
Makes you think.
You know, I've been, I've
been waitin' so long for it to
start snowing so I could see
all of the tracks and know
what's hanging around my camp.
It's a little bit more
than I thought it was,
to be honest, so, um, yeah,
time to get to this latch
before, before
that sun goes down.
Just gotta find about a one,
one-and-a-half-inch diameter,
uh, little spruce tree.
It'll act as the, the
piece that goes in the door.
This one here might work.
I really enjoy
working with my hands.
To, to have a thought, and
to put it down on paper,
and then, take it from
paper, and to apply it,
and actually build it,
is very, very satisfying.
So the plan for the
latch is to take,
uh, two pieces, put 'em up.
Spruce, I'm gonna
have to whittle down.
Probably about 50%.
And that's gonna slide
in and out of that
little box that I make.
And I'll have a hole in the
side of this doorjamb that
this will go into.
Little handle, and
it'll slide in and out.
You know, I think people tend
to go toward other humans when
they wanna feel
like they belong.
But I don't need people
out here to feel like
I belong to something.
I feel like I
belong to this, uh,
this ecosystem,
this environment,
and all the animals.
Nature.
You know, having the bear that
comes around here at night,
I'm a part of that
bear's life now,
and it's kind of
become a part of me.
We have this
weird relationship.
You know, whose, whose
turf is it at what time?
It's like a, a weird respect.
But also, you can't let your
guard down either because
that bear will
capitalize on, you know,
taking my food.
Possibly even turning me into
a meal or definitely Java.
Let's give it the test.
Java, come here!
Java, come on!
You hear her scratching.
Looks like the, looks like
the latch is doing its job.
I hold myself
accountable out here.
It's up to me to
get things done.
Yeah, I'm pretty
happy with it.
Works pretty good.
You have to know how
to apply yourself.
You gotta be confident,
but you can't be arrogant
or cocky either.
And kind of have the
wisdom to know the difference,
or you won't make it.
What do you say, Java?
You wanna go walk out on
the lake or something?
Come on!
Let's go walk out on the ice.
Hmm? Come on!
ALEX: A challenge comes,
I just face it.
I just do my best.
You know, I'm still here.
I'm still alive.
Nobody can say I'm a
failure until I'm dead.
It's a really
good thing I, uh,
took my chimney down now
because all this creosote
inside, if that
gets hot enough,
it'll set on fire.
I can see that there is, uh,
a bit of heat damage in here.
So that's, uh, a
major warning sign.
If it kept going on like that,
there would definitely have
been a fire at some point.
So, it's a good thing
I'm replacing this.
You little son of a bitch.
All this work I have to
do, everything's kind of
conspiring against me to, to
make this job more dangerous
than it has to be.
You know, trying to lift and
haul heavy awkward things
on a steep roof.
I'm using sharp power tools.
And I'm also
working in the dark.
Okay. There you go.
I can see the light at
the end of the tunnel.
The final step is to get this
eight-foot length stove pipe.
Lift this heavy
thing up, and then,
carefully guide it
into the flashing,
so that it rests on the
stovepipe underneath.
Come on.
It wants to tip either way.
How do I prevent
it from doing that?
Uh, once I get, I can get
it to here, that's fine.
It starts to want sliding,
to slide either way.
I just don't
want it to do that,
because I don't,
I, it's too heavy,
I won't be able to just
easily get the control of it.
It's just I don't have any
control over the upper end,
even, even up like this.
If I drop this
thing, if it falls,
it may be ruined.
Adjust my body, see if I
can find the right spot.
I'm not sure if it's on it.
That's got so much
(bleep) sway to it.
And it doesn't hold itself.
(bleep).
And I can't get it off.
(groaning).
I can't get it off.
But now the issue is,
well, the stovepipe's stuck.
It's stuck in the flashing.
I can't leave it
here because if I do,
it's gonna fall over.
It's gonna bend all the metal,
it's gonna tear my
whole chimney up.
It's pretty heavy.
Uh, it's also slick.
Maintaining my balance for
myself and of this pipe is
really difficult.
I'm extremely angry.
Just, uh, you know, a lot
of, it's a lot of stress
compounding, so,
uh, I'm just gonna,
I'm just gonna
let some of it out.
I don't care if I'll die.
If I fall, I fall.
That's it.
(groaning).
You (bleep) big heavy (bleep).
(bleep).
When I hit a road
block, I get angry.
I get mad.
Uh, and I just let it
all out right on the spot.
It helps me kind of
get through it quicker.
(bleep).
Once I kind of get
that bad energy out,
then it helps me
have a level head,
so I can think.
Okay, yeah, I'm stuck.
What do I need to do?
I think I can go inside, and I
can actually feed the chimney
from below, up, up.
Rather than trying to do it
this way because this thing's
just too heavy.
I got no way to handle it.
I can't get it to sit
on there correctly.
So it's, um, I just
can't do it like this.
Time for Plan B.
It's never (bleep)
over 'til it's over.
Okay. All right.
Okay, now get the box off.
Oh, yeah.
Uh, I don't know what the
temperature is right now,
just my, uh, anger
and frustration that's
keeping me warm.
I was just
trying to work fast.
It's getting a lot colder.
That's just gonna make
all this work that
much more difficult.
Yeah, and on top of that, is I
don't want my water to freeze,
I don't want my
food to freeze.
So I need to get this
done fast and efficient.
But this is also my chimney.
And this time, I wanna make
it safe and make one that will
last for a lifetime.
All right.
Um, now I can make a fire.
So, that's done.
Well, that was a
really long day.
It's over now, now,
now, now I got my stove.
MICHAEL: When I
look at these dogs,
they help me get
through the winter of Alaska.
They reinvigorate my spirit.
I find running and working
with these animals just as
therapeutic as it is for the
animals running the miles.
Come here, Mow-Mow.
Right here, we got a
little bit of strong brew.
So every day, there is moose
stew sittin' on the dutch oven.
I dump that juice
into the dogs' water.
So I bait their water.
Trying to get dogs to hydrate,
you gotta trick 'em sometimes.
Oh, you want some boost juice?
Oh, you've been
working hard, buddy.
For working animals
that endure the cold,
it's a lot of upkeep.
You know, I'm the coach,
I'm the mentor,
I'm the leader.
I'm everything to these dogs,
and they've known me since
their eyes first opened.
You give one of
these malamutes a job,
it perks 'em up.
It's what they
thrive and live for.
They wanna work hard.
They're really smart.
And so, it is an honor to work
with this indigenous breed for
which the people of the
northwest Arctic of Alaska
sculpted for
hundreds of generations.
Everybody like
that strong brew?
You better drink it up because
we're gonna keep runnin'.
Can I get an,
"Oh, howl, yeah"?
Awoo!
(howling).
BRITTANY: To raise a
family here in rural Alaska,
it takes a lot of planning,
it takes a lot of willingness,
and you can't half-heart
do anything out here.
KALEB: This thing
is working great.
BRITTANY: Your
little smokehouse?
Moment of truth.
GILBERT: Yummy.
BRITTANY: Kaleb and I have
never been what someone might
call traditional, including
the way we have outdoor meals.
We use an ATV for
our dining room table.
It's a lot of fun in
the non-traditional way.
KALEB: Who wants
the other wing?
ELOVIE: Me!
GILBERT: I do.
BRITTANY: I think there's
nothing better than being by a
bonfire, and having
the stars overhead,
and being with my family.
KALEB: Did you work up
an appetite, Ellie,
going out on
the ptarmigan hunt?
ELOVIE: I did.
KALEB: We might not
have gotten a ptarmigan,
but this is a
good alternative.
Getting to spend the evening
with my family around the
fire is awesome.
And I think that the
smoker is a huge success,
and I'm looking
forward to smoking many,
many other meats
in the future.
BRITTANY: Isn't
this skin so good?
GILBERT: Uh-hmm.
KALEB: Oh, man,
it worked great.
BRITTANY: I'd say that
sometimes the simplest
things are the best.
KALEB: Uh-hmm.
BRITTANY: Are we gonna
eat this whole chicken?
KALEB: Probably.
ELOVIE: Probably.
ALEX: Ooh, look at that.
Yeah, that sap in there,
that'll burn nice and hot.
Puttin' my stove
back together,
making a fire and warming up,
is a moment to savor.
There we go.
Now we're home free.
For me, my woodstove
is like my, my shrine.
When it's cold outside,
I go before my woodstove,
and that's where I,
I have my prayers, right?
Maybe humans have just been
like kind of living with fire
for so many millions of years,
that it's just kind of in our
DNA to, uh, to kind of
revere it or something.
So that's one of the
reasons I came out here.
I wanted to just live
by instincts, you know?
I like kind of
rejecting society,
and, and just going back
to kind of being an animal.
You know, maybe at
some point in the future,
I'll return to society.
I don't really
see that happening,
but at least now I know kind
of a little bit of the
other way to live.
JOHNNY: You want
some of the tea?
The only thing I
answer out here,
Mother Nature and Java.
One of the toughest things at
being isolated is battling the
"What ifs" in my mind.
I'm facing
negative temperatures.
animals that, you know,
wanna maybe take
me or my dog out.
And suddenly, you see a
bear out your window.
That'll stir you up real good.
I have no idea what's
gonna happen every day.
It's very unpredictable.
I wouldn't change
it for the world.
Captioned by Cotter Media Group.